=================================================================================
:class:`passlib.hash.bsdi_crypt` - BSDi (Extended DES) Crypt
=================================================================================

.. currentmodule:: passlib.hash

This algorithm was developed by BSDi for their BSD/OS distribution.
It's based on :class:`~passlib.hash.des_crypt`, and contains a larger
salt and a variable number of rounds.  Nonetheless, since it's based on DES,
and still shares many of des-crypt's other flaws,
it should not be used in new applications.

Usage
=====
Aside from differences in format and salt size,
ext-des-crypt usage is exactly the same as :class:`~passlib.hash.des_crypt`.

.. todo::

    this needs separate usage, showing rounds parameter.

Functions
=========
.. autoclass:: bsdi_crypt

Format
======
An example hash (of ``password``) is ``_EQ0.jzhSVeUyoSqLupI``.
An ext_des_crypt hash string consists of a 21 character string of the form ``_{rounds}{salt}{checksum}``.
All characters except the underscore prefix are drawn from ``[./0-9A-Za-z]``.

* ``_`` - the underscore is used to distinguish this scheme from others, such as des-crypt.
* ``{rounds>`` is the number of rounds, stored as a 4 character :mod:`hash64 <passlib.utils.h64>`-encoded 24-bit integer (``EQ0.`` in the example).
* ``{salt}`` is the salt, stored as as a 4 character hash64-encoded 24-bit integer (``jzhS`` in the example).
* ``{checksum}`` is the checksum, stored as an 11 character hash64-encoded 64-bit integer (``VeUyoSqLupI`` in the example).

A ext_des_crypt configuration string is also accepted by this module;
and has the same format as the hash string, but with the checksum portion omitted.

Algorithm
=========
The checksum is formed by a modified version of the DES cipher in encrypt mode:

* First, the lower 7 bits of the first 8 characters of the password are used
  to form a 56-bit DES key, in the same manner as des-crypt.

* Unlike des-crypt, the remainder of the password is also used. For every additional
  8 characters in the password, the key is encrypted using a single round of DES,
  with itself as the input block. It is then xor'ed against the lower 7 bits
  of the next 8 characters in the password. This is repeated until the password
  is used up.

* The checksum is then generated by recursively performing a variable number rounds of DES encryption
  starting with a null input block. The 24 bits of salt are used to mutate
  the action performed by each block of the DES key schedule (see the source
  of :func:`~passlib.utils.des.mdes_encrypt_int_block` for details).

* The rounds, salt, and checksum are then encoded according the format as described above.

Deviations
==========
This implementation of ext-des-crypt differs from others in one way:

* Before generating a hash, PassLib encodes unicode passwords using UTF-8.
  The original ext-des-crypt was designed for 7-bit us-ascii, so this should not
  conflict with most existing hashes. As of this writing, the authors
  know of no specification defining the official behavior that should be used
  in this situtation.

References
==========
* `<http://fuse4bsd.creo.hu/localcgi/man-cgi.cgi?crypt+3>`_ - primary source used for description of ext-des-crypt format & algorithm
* `<http://ftp.lava.net/cgi-bin/bsdi-man?proto=1.1&query=crypt&msection=3&apropos=0>`_ - another source describing algorithm
